## 🔥 Predicting time-to-threat for evacuation zones using survival analysis
A personal project for WiDS's annual datathon on Kaggle. Wanted to practice `pytorch` and apply it to an interesting problem not typically solved with `pytorch` models.

**From the competition overview:** Your task is to predict the probability that a wildfire will threaten an evacuation zone within `12`, `24`, `48`, and `72 hours`, drawing on data from just the first `5 hours` after ignition.


### 🛠️ Tools and tech
 - `Python`
 - `pandas`
 - `pytorch` for neural network design
 - `scikit-learn` for data preprocessing and feature engineering
 - `matplotlib` and `seaborn` for EDA visualizations
 - `Google Gemini` (all cells containing code generated by Google Gemini contains an `AI disclaimer` at the top and was edited by me)
 - `Google Colab` for dataset and file management

### 🚒 The project
I started with EDA and data visualizations to help myself with feature engineering. After some filtering out features with low correlation, I applied different transformations to the data so my `pytorch` model could learn easier.

I recently started learning `pytorch` in my Intro to Deep Learning class @ UC Berkeley, so I wanted to test it out IRL. I made a simple neural network (meaning, there weren't a ton of parameters) and trained the model on the provided data. I used an `adam` optimizer and `2000` training iterations because the dataset was pretty small and my computer could handle the computation.

In the end, my Kaggle submission recieved a `91%` accuracy score and my in-notebook validation accuracy was `94.66`. In the future, I would probably instead use a `scikit-learn` MLP classifier or an `XGBoost` decision tree to make my predictions. Either way, my model is certainly usable.

### 📖 What I learned
 - I can actually code! In my homeworks and projects, a lot of code is already provided by professors, but this project was different. I got to program everything from start to finish. I only used `Google Gemini` a handful of times, and it was only for tasks that weren't necessary for the project.
 - `pytorch` for MLP classification, how to build and train `pytorch` models, and how to test them.
 -   how to properly preprocess to prevent data leakage — next I want to learn how to preprocess entirely using `scikit-learn`.

### 🗃️ Files
- `WiDS_datathon.ipynb` contains preprocessing and neural network training

### 📄 Citation
Bryan Muñoz, María Cruz, Valentina Torres da Silva, Yao Yan, Gabe Schine, WiDS Worldwide, and WatchDuty . *WiDS Global Datathon 2026*.
https://kaggle.com/competitions/WiDSWorldWide_GlobalDathon26, 2026. Kaggle.
